4) Research Report Paper:
All participants must complete and submit a 1500 – 3000 word research report paper describing
their project related internship activities, using appropriate elements excerpted from the Style
Manual from the American Institute of Physics, as defined under the Guidelines, Requirements,
and Instructions. Submission of the research report paper must be made prior to the end of
your appointment, as directed by the host laboratory.
Development of the materials required to fulfill the deliverables may be performed using word 
processing and/or graphics design/presentation software of your choice, but all final copies must be 
made available in an Adobe Acrobat (.pdf) file format, and submitted using  your account on the 
WDTS Application and Review System (WARS) online system, via the Deliverables tab. Detailed 
instructions for preparing and submitting (uploading in WARS) Acrobat file formatted copies of 
1 
deliverables will be available from your internship host institution. Guidelines, requirements, and 
instructions for preparing the program deliverables follow directly below.

4. RESEARCH REPORT PAPER 
The main text of the paper is to be between 1500 and 3000 words. The word count does not include 
footnotes, appendices, the bibliography and similar items. All appendices together must be three pages 
or less. The form of the paper should follow the guidelines of the appropriate portions of the Style 
Manual from the American Institute of Physics. The final paper that you submit should be in 
"publication" form. Submission must be made using the WARS online system, as an Adobe Acrobat (.pdf) 
file, prior to the end of their appointment and as directed by the host laboratory. Host institutions will 
provide submission system relevant instructions and may also provide additional related resources and 
guidance. 
Writing this paper is not a trivial task and will require significant time and effort to complete. Be sure to 
allow plenty of time to complete and polish your paper. If writing does not come easily to you, do not 
hesitate to seek help early in the process. Nearly every person who has read scholarly scientific reports 
emphasize that clear, uncomplicated exposition of the research and its findings is the single most 
important factor which separates good reports from bad. The following suggestions are widely 
recommended by knowledgeable and successful writers, but they assume that you can write clear 
expository English. If you use the passive tense, write long sentences, and use jargon, you should also 
seek to improve your overall writing skills. General advice: 
5 
1) Allow sufficient time - Allow enough time to do a good job. All successful writers say that it 
takes time to generate high quality reports. 
2) Be organized - Write logically and clearly. Make an outline of the points you want to make 
before you start, and then join them together in a coherent fashion. 
3) Give the broad picture - Explain what you are doing and why it is important to your topical 
area of research. Provide a background which places your project in context. 
4) Write for your audience - Guide the reviewer to the key points. Don't assume the reader 
will know your particular field of science or engineering. Some readers will be from outside 
your topical field. Try to put yourself into the mind of the reader. Answer any questions 
you would have if you were reading the report. 
5) Highlight your research - Explain why your approach to the problem is appropriate and 
what resources you used. Demonstrate what you completed as in intern working on the 
project. 
6) Include your qualifications - Establish what you have learned or now know from what you 
were doing. Include relevant references, but make the gist of the reference clear. A person 
reading the report will not necessarily want to have to obtain the reference and read it in 
order to really understand your report.  
7) Get an outside opinion - Finally, show your paper to one or more colleagues, or your 
advisor, for comments. Ask them for an honest assessment of strengths and weaknesses. 
Listen to their comments and revise the paper accordingly. 
The instructions for preparing the research report paper contain, or follow, revised and/or excerpted 
elements from the American Institute of Physics (AIP) Style Manual (4th edition, 1990). This manual 
provides a basis for material submitted to the journals published by the AIP, which comprise much of 
the physics literature published in the U.S. Many American physicists refer to the manual frequently and 
follow its dictates when writing and you are required to do so, selectively, when writing your SULI 
research project report paper. 
Because your SULI paper will not, in general, be written for AIP publication, some parts of the full AIP 
Style Manual are not relevant to or important for your assignment.  In the revised and/or excerpted 
version here, this unneeded material has been removed. The elements below under the heading 
Preparing the Research Report Paper should be followed, and/or included, in the completed and 
submitted version of your research report paper. 
Preparing the Research Report Paper 
I. General instructions 
(1) Submit manuscripts in English only (American spelling). If you are not fluent in English, ask a 
colleague who is to read and correct your manuscript. 
(2) Indent paragraphs, so that the start of a new paragraph is clearly distinguished from the 
continuation of an existing one after a displayed equation. 
6 
(3) Number all pages in sequence, beginning with the title and abstract page. 
(4) Use a minimum 12 point font. 
II. Title 
(1) Place the title about a third of the way down from the top of the first page. 
(2) Begin the first word with a capital letter; thereafter capitalize only proper names and acronyms. 
III. Abstract 
(1) Begin the abstract on a new line. 
(2) Use wider side margins for the abstract than for the rest of the manuscript, so that it will be clear 
where the abstract ends and the main text begins. 
(3) Type or print the abstract double spaced, preferably as one paragraph of continuous text. Avoid 
displayed mathematical expressions, figures, and tables. 
(4) If a reference to the literature is needed, write it out within square brackets in the text of the 
abstract rather than referring to the list at the end of the paper. For example: The measurement of 
hydrogen permeation into iron reported by W. R. Wampler [J. Appl. Phys. 65, 4040 (1989)], who used a 
new method based on ion beam analysis,... 
(5) Define all nonstandard symbols, abbreviations, and acronyms. 
IV. Section headings 
(1) Write principal headings in all capital letters and lower-level headings with an initial capital letter to 
the first word only, as shown in Table I. 
(2) If headings are numbered or lettered, use the scheme indicated in Table 1: roman numbers, capital 
letters, Arabic numerals, and lower-case letters in that sequence for the four levels of heading. Number 
or letter consecutively through the text. 
TABLE I. The four levels of section headings in the body of a manuscript. 
As printed in most journals 
I. PRINCIPAL HEADING 
A. First subheading 
7 
1. Second subheading 
a. Third subheading. Followed immediately, on the same line, by text. 
V. Acknowledgments 
(1) The acknowledgments section follows the main text of the paper and precedes any appendixes and 
the list of references. 
(2) It is recommended that this section be given a principal heading ("ACKNOWLEDGMENTS”), but if 
there is only one acknowledgment the singular form may be used. 
VI. Appendixes 
(1) Appendixes follow the acknowledgments and precede the list of references. 
(2) Headings to appendixes have the form of principal headings. If there are two or more appendixes, 
they can be labeled A, B, C, etc. Examples: 
APPENDIX 
APPENDIX: CALCULATION OF F(t) 
APPENDIX A 
APPENDIX C: PROOF OF THE EQUIVALENCE THEOREM 
VII. Footnotes and references 
(1) Type or print each footnote as a separate indented paragraph beginning with the appropriate 
superscript indicator. 
(2) For references cited in the text use superscript numerals running consecutively through the text: 1, 2, 
3, etc. Place citation indicators after commas, periods, quotation marks, colons, and semicolons: 
As pointed out by Bray,6 these calculations are in agreement with other experimental values.7,8 
We obtained the following values for the two parameters:13-15 I = 0.775 and r0 = 0.590. 
Do not put citation indicators where they might be mistaken for numbers with a different meaning. 
Write: 
A recent measurement2 of v... 
instead of 
8 
A recent measurement of v2... 
(3) In text, refer to authors by last name (surname, family name) only. In the references themselves, give 
authors' names in the form in which they appear on the title page of the cited work. For names in the 
west European tradition, retain the order that puts the family name last (for example, John J. Doe, not 
Doe, John J.). 
(4) For the recommended form and content of bibliographic references see Table II. 
In journal references, give the volume number, the article title, the inclusive page numbers (first and 
last), and the year of publication. 
Include the issue when the journal is not paginated consecutively through the volume (for example, 
Physics Today, Scientific American). Give the year in place of the volume number only when the journal 
does not use volume numbers. References to errata should be labeled as such, as should references to 
"abstract only" or "title only" publications. 
In book references always include the title, the authors' or editors' names, the publisher's name and 
location, and the year of publication. References to laboratory reports should not contain abbreviations 
or acronyms for the names of laboratories or agencies; spell them out. 
The use of the expression "et al." (as in "Jones et al.8 studied this reaction in 1982") is encouraged in the 
body of the paper, but discouraged in the references unless there are more than three authors' names. 
"In press" or "to be published" means that the paper has been accepted for publication in a journal, and 
the title of the journal must be given. Such a reference may be updated at the proof stage if the 
referenced paper has been published by then. 
(5) Refer to the original sources whenever possible as you gather details for bibliographic references. Do 
not rely on intermediate citations, which may contain misspelled names or erroneous volume and page 
numbers and publication dates. 
(6) Avoid references to unpublished material that is difficult or impossible to obtain. 
(7) For footnotes to tables, see point (8) of the next section. 
VIII. Tables 
(1) Tabular material more than four or five lines long should be presented as a numbered table with a 
caption and not included as part of the running text. 
(2) Type or print each table double spaced on a separate page after the references and before the figure 
captions. Place the table caption directly above the table to which it belongs, not on a separate sheet. 
See Table III for an example. 
9 
(3) Number the tables in the order of appearance in the text, and make sure each table is cited in text. 
Tables displayed and cited in proper sequence in the main body of the paper may be mentioned out of 
sequence in the introduction. 
(4) Give every table a caption that is complete and intelligible in itself without reference to the text. 
(5) Give every column a heading. Make it clear and concise. Capitalize the first word of a heading unless 
it is a standard abbreviation that is always used lower-case. 
Units of measurement should be placed in parentheses on the line below the appropriate heading. 
Choose units so that entries are near unity in magnitude, so that, as far as possible, powers of ten are 
not needed for most entries. 
(6) Align columns of related numbers by decimal. Do not use "ditto" or any symbol such as quotation 
marks to indicate repeated entries; write each entry out in full. Use raised dots (...) instead of dashes to 
indicate missing values. 
(7) Type or print a double horizontal line below the table caption, a single line below column headings, 
and another double line at the end of the table. Avoid vertical lines between columns: use appropriate 
spacing instead. 
(8) Footnotes to a table are indicated by a sequence of lower-case letters a, b, c, etc., with a new 
sequence starting with a for each table. The ordering of footnote indicators should be left to right across 
one row, and then left to right across the next row, and so on. Place the footnotes themselves below the 
double line at the end of the table. 
TABLE II. Examples of footnotes 
Kind of footnote 
Journal article 
citations 
Issue number 
included 
Book reference 
Reference to 
As typed in paper 
1Gale Young and R. E. Funderlic, "Positron decay in Na," J. Appl. Phys. 44, 5151
5153 (1973). 
2M. D. Levinson, "Rate of decay of auditory sensation," Phys. Today 30 (5), 44-49 
(1977). 
3
L. S. Berks, Electron Probe Microanalysis, 2nd ed. (Wiley, New York, 1971), p. 
40.  
4D. K. Edwards, in Proceedings of Ihe 1972 Heat Transfer Institute, edited by R. B. 
Landis (Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 1972), pp. 71-72. 
5
R. C. Mikkelson (private communication). 
10 
unpublished work 
(9) In designing a large table, take into account the size of the journal page on which it is to be printed. 
Tables may be continued onto a second page or beyond, in which case the column headings will be 
repeated. Tables may also be turned 90° from the usual orientation. 
IX. Figures and figure captions 
Figures play a significant role in the expression of scientific ideas. A single well-prepared figure can 
contribute immeasurably to the clarity of the text, and high standards of presentation are therefore 
particularly important.  
(1)  Number figures in order of their appearance in the text and make sure that every figure is cited. 
Figures displayed and cited in proper sequence in the main body of the paper may be mentioned 
out of sequence in the introduction. 
(2)  Every figure must have a caption that is complete and intelligible in itself without reference to the 
text. Type each caption as one paragraph, beginning with the figure number in the form: 
FIG. 1. Variation of distance R with... 
In captions, use symbols to represent data points, but use words to identify curves (for example, "solid," 
"dashed," "dotted," "dot-dashed," etc.). A better alternative is to label curves with letters (A, B, etc.) and 
to refer to them by letter in the caption ("Curve A represents...”). 
(3) Figures can be in color when necessary, and where the color adds scientific information not clearly 
available in an equivalent monochrome version.  
(4)  Graphs should be self-explanatory, their purpose evident without reference to the text. Indicate 
clearly what is being plotted, in both the horizontal and the vertical directions. Include appropriate 
units. Orient letters and numbers so that they may be easily read from the bottom or the right-hand 
side of the graph. Relevant nongraphic material, such as the key to the symbolism in the graph, may 
be included within the confines of the graph frame if it will fit without crowding; otherwise put the 
explanatory material in the caption. 
The notation used in graphs should be standard and consistent with the notation used in the text. 
Write 0.1, not .1, 0 1, or 0,1. Do not capitalize letters indiscriminately: write 
in units of q/a, not IN UNITS OF q/a 
and 
11 
kinetic energy Ef(meV) not KINETIC ENERGY Ef (MEV) 
Take care to preserve standard forms for symbols and abbreviations, as you would in text. Standard 
units should be well spaced off and enclosed in parentheses. 
If possible, do not use powers of ten in axis labels: use instead the appropriate prefixes of the 
Systeme International (see Table IV). If powers of ten must be used, write for example 
R( 10-4[Omega]) or 104R ([Omega]). 
Never write 
R x 10-4[Omega] or R /10-4[Omega], 
because in these forms it is not clear whether the scale numbers have been or are to be multiplied 
by 10-4. Better still; attach the power of ten to the largest number on the axis: 8 x 10-4. 
Whenever possible, use integer numbers on the axis scales of figures (1, 2, 3, or O, 5, 10, not 1.58, 
3.16, 4.75 or 1.5, 3.0, 4.5). If this is not feasible, then there must be a number both before and after 
the decimal point: Use 0.5, not .5, and 5, not 5., etc. Do not use unnecessary decimal places: 1.0, 1.5, 
2.0 is acceptable, but not 1.00, 2.00, 3.00. 
Coordinate ruling should be limited in number to those necessary to guide the eye in making a 
reading to the desired degree of approximation. Ticks to indicate coordinate values, placed within all 
four sides of the graph, increase readability, and are recommended. Closely spaced coordinate 
rulings are appropriate only for computation charts. It is often impossible in a journal to make a 
graph large enough to preserve accuracy of the data beyond two significant figures. If that accuracy 
is not sufficient for your purposes, present the data as a table. 
Graphs with large blank areas, or large areas containing only nongraphic material, are unacceptable; 
use only the ranges of coordinates for which there are data. If similar quantities are plotted several 
times, uses shifted ordinate scales for each plot and enclose the plots in one large rectangle, not in 
separate boxes, thereby saving space. Isometric drawings giving the illusion of three dimensions to 
the family of curves are often better. 
(5)  In diagrams of electrical circuits, the values of resistances, inductances, etc. and component 
designations should be lettered directly on the diagram. A separate parts list in the caption is then 
unnecessary, except for special or unusual components. 
X. Mathematical expressions and equations 
12 
Display all numbered and complicated unnumbered equations on separate lines set off from the text 
above and below. "Complicated" equations are equations hard to accommodate within running text. 
These include equations longer than about 25 characters. 
(1) Equation numbers: 
(a) Only displayed equations may be numbered. 
(b) The preferred style is to number equations consecutively throughout the text with Arabic 
numerals in parentheses: (1), (2), (3), etc. Numbering by section is also acceptable, if the section 
number is made part of the equation number: (2.1), (2.2), (2.3), etc. In appendixes use the 
numbering sequence (Al), (A2), (A3), etc. 
(c) Place equation numbers flush with the right margin. Leave a space at least two 
characters wide between an equation and its number. 
(d) An equation number should be centered beside a group of equations identified by one number, 
as in Eqs. (2), (6), and (7) on this page. It should be aligned with the last line of 
a multilinear equation, as in Eqs. (3)- (5). 
(2) Roman versus italic type: 
(a) According to conventional practice, Latin letters used as mathematical symbols are set in italic 
type to distinguish them from ordinary roman text... 
(b) Boldface is used for three-vectors, dyadics, some matrices, tensors without indices, etc. It is 
inappropriate for four-vectors (k), vectors represented by a typical component, such as xi for x = 
(x1, x2, x3), and the magnitude of a vector, H for H. Subscripts attached to a three-vector should 
not be boldface unless they would be so as main characters. 
(c) When it is essential to distinguish between vectors and tensors, sans serif may be used for 
tensors. 
Additional writing guidance and suggestions 
No two scientific papers are sufficiently alike that any tidy group of fixed rules for writing a scientific 
paper could apply to all papers with inevitable success. It is possible, however, to state principles and 
offer suggestions that will encourage any author to present a body of scientific information in a 
reasonably smooth and coherent form. Please carefully read and study the following guidance, which 
describe best practices for developing and writing content for the 10 items listed above. 
 Before beginning to write 
Despite the natural tendency to feel that no work is being done on a paper if no actual writing is under 
way, adequate preparation can help ensure a logical, readable product and shorten the writing time. 
Preparation can follow these steps. 
13 
(1) Analyze the problem. Ask yourself at least these four questions: 
(a) Exactly what information do I wish to present in this paper? 
(b) For what specific group of readers am I writing? 
(c) What background information can I assume these readers have? 
(d) What is the most logical sequence in which I should present the information to the readers? 
(2)  Make a detailed outline. The outline will serve as your writing guide; therefore, make as many 
subdivisions as possible. It is easier to eliminate or combine existing subheadings than to insert new 
ones. As you write, you will, almost certainly, revise the outline. Even if the outline suffers drastic 
revision before the paper is finished, the very act of preparing and modifying it serves as a mental 
stimulus that goes far toward ensuring logical development of the subject matter. Be sure your 
outline reflects the true structure and emphasis you wish your paper to have. Remember that many 
hurried readers will scan the headings and subheadings to determine if they need to read the entire 
text; try to help them by making the headings informative and logical. 
(3)  Plan tables and figures. You may already have thought about the tables and figures while preparing 
the outline, but if not, do it at this stage. Some data lend themselves to presentation in tabular 
form; others do not. Appropriate figures can be very valuable, but there are times when a few good 
sentences convey more information than a drawing or photograph. Avoid unnecessarily duplicating 
data in tables and figures. Select the form of presentation--tables, figures, or text--with the efficient 
presentation of your data as the only criterion. 
(4)  Sit and think. This step should precede, follow, and be interspersed with the others. In other words, 
do not try to rush through the entire process in one continuous effort, but continually stop and 
review what you have done and think again about what is to come. 
 General rules for writing 
The following rules can be applied with profit to all technical writing and to all parts of a scientific paper.  
(1)  Be clear. Consider the beauty and efficiency of the simple declarative sentence as a medium for 
communicating scientific information. Use it freely, but not exclusively. Avoid long, meandering 
sentences in which the meaning may be obscured by complicated or unclear construction. 
(2)  Be concise. Avoid vague and inexact usage. Be as quantitative as the subject matter permits. Avoid 
idle words; make every word count. 
(3)  Be complete. Do not assume that your reader has all the background information that you have on 
your subject matter. Make sure your argument is complete, logical, and continuous. Use commonly 
understood terms instead of local or highly specialized jargon. Define all nonstandard symbols and 
14 
abbreviations when you introduce them. On the other hand, omit information unnecessary for a 
complete understanding of your message. 
(4)  Put yourself constantly in the place of your reader. Be rigorously self-critical as you review your first 
drafts, and ask yourself "Is there any way in which this passage could be misunderstood by someone 
reading it for the first time?"  
  Selecting a title 
The time to decide on a title is after the manuscript has been completed. It must achieve a compromise 
between succinct brevity and overly complete description. Omit decorative locutions such as "Thoughts 
on ...," "Regarding ...." Avoid nonstandard abbreviations and acronyms. If properly written a title is short 
enough to be intelligible at a glance but long enough to tell a physicist if the paper is of interest to him 
or her. 
 Abstract 
An abstract must accompany your research report, and this is distinct from the General Audience 
Abstract. It should be a concise summary of the significant items in the paper, including the results and 
conclusions. In combination with the title it must be an adequate indicator of the content of the article. 
The abstract should not contain literature citations that refer to the main list of references attached to 
the complete article, nor allusions to the illustrations. Define all nonstandard symbols and abbreviations. 
Do not include tabular material or illustrations of any kind. Avoid "built-up" equations that cannot be 
rendered in linear fashion within the running text. Prepare it as a single paragraph. It should be no 
longer than about 500 words. 
The primary purpose of the abstract is to help prospective readers decide whether to read the rest of 
your paper. Bear in mind that it will appear, detached from the paper, in abstract journals and on-line 
information services. Therefore it must be complete and intelligible in itself; it should not be necessary 
to read the paper in order to understand the abstract. 
The abstract should be a clear, concise summary of the principal facts and conclusions of the paper, 
organized to reflect its pattern of emphasis. Remember that some readers may use the abstract in lieu 
of the parent document. The title and abstract together will often be used as a basis for indexing; hence 
they must mention all the subjects, major and minor, treated in the paper. Understanding these 
considerations, you will want to give as much care to writing the abstract as you did to writing the 
paper. Some guidelines to assist in this task follow. 
(1)  State the subject of the paper immediately, indicating its scope and objectives. Do this in terms 
understandable to a nonspecialist. Describe the treatment given the subject by one or more such 
terms such as "brief," "comprehensive," "preliminary," "experimental," or "theoretical." 
(2)  Summarize the experimental or theoretical results, the conclusions, and other significant items in 
the paper. Do not hesitate to give numerical results or state your conclusions in the abstract. 
15 
(3)  If the paper is one of a series, indicate that there are related papers. 
(4)  Indicate the methods used to obtain experimental results. If they are novel, state the basic 
principles involved, the operational ranges covered, and the degree of accuracy attained. 
(5)  Do not cite the literature references by the numbers in the list at the end of the paper, and do not 
refer by number to a selection, equation, table, or figure within the paper. Nonstandard symbols 
and abbreviations used in the abstract must be defined there as well as in the main text. 
(6)  Use running text only. Never use displayed mathematical expressions or numbered equations. Omit 
tables, figures, and footnotes. 
(7)  Keep the length of the abstract to a small percentage of that of the paper. Write concise, 
straightforward English; make every word count. Try to substitute words for phrases and phrases for 
clauses. Be terse, but not telegraphic; do not omit a's, an's, or the's. Regardless of the length of the 
final draft of your abstract, study it again with a view to shortening it further to a minimum length. 
(8)  As with the paper itself, have the abstract read critically by some of your colleagues for clarity, 
completeness, proper emphasis, and objectivity. 
 The introduction 
Every scientific paper should have at least one or two introductory paragraphs; whether this 
introduction should be a separately labeled section depends upon the length of the paper. 
Paradoxically, although it appears first it should be written last. You will probably find it easier to start 
writing the introductory text after you have written part or all of the main body of the paper; in this 
way, the overall structure and content are more easily seen. 
The first sentence of the paper is often the most difficult to write. It is important enough, however, to 
deserve considerable time and attention. The first sentence and the first paragraph play a critical role in 
determining the reader's attitude toward the paper as a whole. For best results, be sure to: 
(1)  Make the precise subject of the paper clear early in the introduction. As soon as possible, inform the 
reader what the paper is about. Depending on what you expect your typical reader already knows 
on the subject, you may or may not find it necessary to include historical background, for example. 
Include such information only to the extent necessary for the reader to understand your statement 
of the subject of the paper. 
(2)  Indicate the scope of coverage of the subject. Somewhere in the introduction state the limits within 
which you treat the subject. This definition of scope may include such things as the ranges of 
parameters dealt with, any restrictions made upon the general subject covered by the paper, and 
whether the work is theoretical or experimental. 
(3)  State the purpose of the paper. Every legitimate scientific paper has a purpose that distinguishes it 
from other papers on the same general subject. Make clear in the introduction just what this 
16 
purpose is. The reader should know what the point of view and emphasis of the paper will be, and 
what you intend to accomplish with it. 
(4)  Indicate the organization of the paper when its length and complexity are great enough. Short 
papers should have an obvious organization, readily apparent to the casual reader; long papers, 
however, can benefit from a summary of the major section headings in the introduction. 
 Main body of the paper 
Presumably, you tentatively decided on the form and content of the main body of your paper, which 
contains all the important elements of the message you want to convey, when you first decided to write 
the paper. Now review those decisions in light of the advice given above and write the sections that 
make up this part of your article. Then read through your first draft, asking yourself such questions as: 
(1) Have I included all the information necessary to convey my message? 
(2) Have I eliminated all superfluous material? 
(3) Have I given proper emphasis to important ideas and subordinated those of lesser importance? 
(4) Is the development of the subject matter logical and complete, free of gaps and discontinuities? 
(5) Have I been as quantitative as I could in presenting the material? 
(6) Have I made the best use of tables and figures, and are they well designed? 
(7) Are the facts I have presented adequate to support the conclusions I intend to draw? 
Now revise the first draft of the main body of your paper in the light of your answers to these questions 
and others that occurred to you as you read the draft. 
 The conclusion 
Typical functions of the conclusion of a scientific paper include (1) summing up, (2) a statement of 
conclusions, (3) a statement of recommendations, and (4) a graceful termination. Any one of these, or 
any combination, may be appropriate for a particular paper. Some papers do not need a separate 
concluding section, particularly if the conclusions have already been stated in the introduction. 
(1)  Summing up is likely to be the major function of the final section of a purely informational paper. If 
you include a summary, make sure you include only references to material that appeared earlier in 
complete form. 
(2)  Conclusions are convictions based on evidence. If you state conclusions, make certain that they 
follow logically from data you presented in the paper, and that they agree with what you promised 
in the introduction. 
17 
(3)  Recommendations are more likely to be found in, say, technical reports than in scientific papers. But 
if you do include recommendations make sure they flow logically from data and conclusions 
presented earlier, with all necessary supporting evidence. As with the conclusions, 
recommendations should not disagree with what you led the reader to expect in your introduction. 
(4)  Graceful termination is achieved when the final sentence introduces no new thought but 
satisfactorily rounds off all that has gone before. Be warned against duplicating large portions of the 
introduction in the conclusion. Verbatim repetition is boring, creates a false unity, and is no 
compliment to the reader's attentiveness. 
 Acknowledgments 
In general, limit acknowledgments to those who helped directly in the research itself or during 
discussions on the subject of the research. Acknowledgments to typists or illustrators are discouraged, 
as are acknowledgments to anonymous referees. Financial support of all kinds (for the specific piece of 
work reported, to an author, or to the institution where the work was carried out) is best acknowledged 
here rather than as footnotes to the title or to an author's name. 
 Appendixes 
Appendixes conclude the text of a paper. Few papers need them. Their best use is for supplementary 
material that is necessary for completeness but which would detract from the orderly and logical 
presentation of the work if inserted into the body of the paper. A proof of a theorem is a good example 
of material of this type. 
Appendixes may also be used for supplementary material that is valuable to the specialist but of limited 
interest to the general reader. 
  Final draft 
When you have completed the first draft of your manuscript, lay it aside for several days. Then re-read it 
critically for final revisions. Ask two or three colleagues, at least one of whom is less familiar with the 
subject than you are, to read your manuscript critically for clarity, conciseness, completeness, logic, and 
readability. If one of these readers tells you that a passage is unclear, do not argue that it is, in fact, 
perfectly clear (to you!). Take the comment seriously and change the passage until it suits both of you. 
 Proofreading the paper 
As a final step before submitting the manuscript, proofread it. There are always errors, however 
excellent the typist. Ask someone else to proofread it too: a fresh pair of eyes can find errors you have 
overlooked. As you proofread, check the following points: 
(a)  If the section headings are numbered or lettered, are they numbered or lettered consecutively 
according to the scheme in Table I? Are the cross-references to sections correct? 
18 
(b)  Are all ambiguous mathematical symbols identified? 
(c)  Are all numbered equations in proper sequence and cited correctly in text? 
(d)  Are all footnotes and references cited in the paper? Do all the citation indicators in text refer to the 
correct footnote or reference? 
(e)  Are all tables and figures cited in order in the text? 
 Units of Measure 
The following is a listing of circa 1990 typical units of measure used in the physical sciences. Current 
usage may vary, and some units may not be listed. This list is for reference only, and additional 
resources should be used for updated and more extensive information, or for application to other 
research disciplines. Units marked with asterisks are base, derived, or supplementary units of the 
Systeme International. 
Unit Abbreviation 
abampere - spell out 
abohm - spell out 
abvolt - spell out 
amagat - spell out 
*ampere - A 
ampere hour - A h 
ampere turns per meter - At/m 
angstrom - Å 
arc minute - arc min 
astronomical unit - AU 
atmosphere - atm 
atmosphere, standard - As 
atomic mass unit - u 
atomic parts per million - at. ppm 
atomic percent - at. % 
atomic time unit - atu 
atomic unit- a.u. 
attofarad - aF 
bar - spell out 
19 
bark - spell out 
barn - b 
barye - spell out 
biot - Bi 
bit or bits - spell out 
blobs per hundred microns - blobs/(100 um) 
bohr - spell out 
British thermal unit - Btu 
bytes - spell out 
calorie - cal 
*candela - cd 
candelas per square meter - cd/m2 
candlepower - cp 
centimeter - cm 
centipoise - cP 
*coulomb - C 
counts per minute - counts/min, cpm 
counts per second - counts/s 
cubic centimeter - cm3, (cc not rec.) 
curie - Ci 
cycle - spell out, c 
cycles per second - cps, c/s 
day d, - or spell out 
debye - D 
decibel - dB, dBm 
degree - [ring], deg 
degrees - Baumé [ring]B 
degrees - Celsius (centigrade) [ring]C 
degrees - Fahrenheit [ring]F 
degrees - Kelvin K 
disintegrations per minute - dis/min 
disintegrations per minute per microgram - dis/min ug 
20 
disintegrations per second - dis/s 
dyne - dyn 
electromagnetic unit - emu 
electron barn - eb 
electrons per atom - e/at. 
electrons per cubic centimeter - e/cm3, e/cc, e cm-3 
electron unit - e.u. 
electron volt - eV 
electrostatic unit - esu 
entropy unit - eu 
erg - spell out 
*farad - F 
femtofarad - fF 
femtometer - fm 
fermi - F 
fissions per minute - fpm 
foot - ft 
foot-candle - fc 
foot-lambert - fL 
foot-pound - ft lb 
formula units - f.u. 
franklin - Fr 
gal - Gal (unit of gravitational force 
centistoke - cS 
gallon - gal 
gauss - G 
gibbs - spell out 
gigacycles per second - Gc/s 
giga-electron-volt - GeV 
gigahertz - GHz 
gigavolt - GV 
gilbert - Gi 
21 
gram - g 
hartree - spell out 
hectogram - hg 
*henry - H 
*hertz - Hz 
horsepower - hp 
hour - h 
inch - in. 
*joule - J 
kayser - K 
*kelvin - K 
kilobar - kbar 
kilobyte - kbyte 
kilocalorie - kcal 
kilocycles per second - kc/s 
kilodegrees Kelvin - kK 
kilodyne - kdyn 
kilo-electron-volt - keV 
kilogauss - kG 
*kilogram - kg 
kilogram force - kgf 
kilogram meter - kg m 
kilohertz - kHz 
kilohm - k[Omega] 
kilojoule - kJ 
kilomegacycles per second - kMc/s 
kilometer - km 
kilo-oersted - kOe 
kiloparsec - kpc 
kilosecond - ks,ksec 
kiloton - kt 
kilovolt - kV 
22 
kilovolt ampere - kV A 
kilowatt - kW 
kilowatt hour - kW h 
knot - kn 
lambert - L 
langmuir - L 
liter - l, L 
Lorentz unit - LU 
*lumen - lm 
lumens per watt - lm/W 
*lux - lx 
Mach - M 
maxwell - Mx 
megahertz - MHz 
megacycles per second - Mc/s 
mega-electron-volt - MeV 
megarad - Mrad 
megavolt - MV 
megawatt - MW 
megohm - M[Omega] 
meter - m 
meter-kilogram-second ampere - mksa 
meter-kilogram-second coulomb - mksc 
meter of water equivalent - mwe, m (w.e.) 
mho - ohm-1 
microampere - µA 
microampere hour - µA h 
microcoulomb - µC 
microfarad - µF 
microhm - µ[Omega] 
micrometer - µm 
micromole - µmol 
23 
microm - µm 
microns of mercury - µm Hg 
microsecond - µs, µsec 
microunit - µu 
mil - spell out 
mile - spell out 
milliampere - mA 
millibarn - mb 
millicurie - mCi 
millidegrees - Kelvin mK 
milligram - mg 
millihenry - mH 
milliliter - ml 
millimeter - mm 
millimeters of mercury - mm Hg 
millimicron - mµm 
million electron volt - MeV 
million volt - MV 
milliunit - mu 
millivolt - mV 
minute - (i) min, (ii)' 
molal (concentration) - m 
molar (concentration) - M 
*mole - mol or spell out 
mole percent - mol %, mole % 
mole percent metal - MPM 
month - spell out 
nanobarn - nb 
nanometer - nm 
nanosecond - ns, nsec 
nanoseconds per meter - ns/m 
neper - Np 
24 
neutrons per fission - n/[florin] 
neutrons per second - n/s 
neutrons per seond per square cm - n/s cm2 
*newton - N 
normal (concentration) - N 
oersted - Oe 
*ohm - [Omega] 
ohm centimeter - [Omega] cm 
ohm centimeter per centimeter per cubic centimeter - [Omega] cm/(cm/cm3) 
ounce - oz 
parsec - pc 
parts per billion - ppb 
parts per million - ppm 
*pascal - Pa 
picofarad - pF 
poise - P 
pound - lb 
pound-force per square inch - lb/in.2 
pounds per square inch - psi 
pounds per square inch absoloute - psi (absolute) 
pounds per square inch gauge - psi (gauge) 
rad - spell out 
*radian - rad 
radiation length - r.I. 
reciprocal ohm - mho 
revolutions per minute - rpm 
revolutions per second - rev/s, rps 
roentgen - R 
rydberg - Ry 
*second - (i) s, sec (ii)" 
shake - spell out 
*siemens - S 
25 
standard cubic centimeter per second - sccm 
statampere - spell out 
statohm - spell out 
statvolt - spell out 
*steradian - sr 
stoke - S 
tera-electron-volt - TeV 
tetrahertz - Thz 
*tesla - T 
ton - spell out 
torr - Torr, torr 
townsend - Td 
unified atomic mass unit - u 
*volt - V 
volume percent - vol % 
*watt - W 
*weber - Wb 
webers per square meter - Wb/m2 
week - spell out 
weight percent - wt% 
Weisskopf unit - W.u. 
year - yr 
 Standard Abbreviations 
The following abbreviations (and acronyms) may be used without explanation, but this list dates to circa 
1990, hence current usage may vary. This list is for reference only, and additional resources should be 
used for updated and more extensive information. In general, all abbreviations and acronyms should be 
defined when first introduced in manuscript, unless they appear on this list or are now commonly 
known and accepted as such. 
alternating-current - ac 
altitude - alt 
anno Domini - A.D. 
ante meridiem - a.m. 
26 
antilogarithm - antilog 
aperture ratio 16 - f/16 
approximate (in subscript) - approx 
arccosecant - arccsc 
arccosine - arccos 
arccotangent - arccot 
arcsecant - arcsec 
arcsine - arcsin 
arctangent - arctan 
argument - arg 
audio-frequency - af 
average (in subscript) - av 
Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer - BCS 
body-centered-cubic - bcc 
boiling point - bp 
Boltzmann constant - k,kB 
calculated (in subscript) - calc 
center of mass - c.m. 
centimeter-gram-second (system) - cgs 
chapter - Chap. 
chemically pure - cp 
coefficient (in subscript) - coeff 
cologarithm - colog 
Company - Co. 
complex conjugate - c.c. 
Confer (compare) - cf. 
confidence limits - C.L. 
constant - const 
contact potential difference - cpd 
continuous-wave - cw 
Corporation - Corp. 
cosecant - csc 
27 
cosine - cos 
cotangent - cot 
cubic - cu 
curl - Vx 
deoxyribose nucleic acid - DNA 
determinant - det 
deviation - dev 
diameter - diam 
direct-current - dc 
District of Columbia - D.C. 
divergence - div 
east - E 
edition - ed. 
elastic (in subscript) - el 
electromotive force - emf 
electron paramagnetic resonance - EPR 
electron spin resonance - ESR 
equation - Eq. 
equations - Eqs. 
error function - erf 
error function (complement of) - erfc 
estimated standard deviation - e.s.d. 
et alii (and others) - et al. 
exempli gratia (for example) - e.g. 
experiment(al) (in subscript) - expt 
exponential - e,exp 
face-centered-cubic - fcc 
figure - Fig. 
figures - Figs. 
frequency-modulation - FM 
gradient - grad 
gram-atom - g-at. 
28 
gram-atomic-weight - g.at. wt 
Hermitian conjugate - H.c. 
hexagonal-close-packed - hcp 
high-frequency - hf 
hyperbolic cosecant - csch 
hyperbolic cosine - cosh 
hyperbolic cotangent - coth 
hyperbolic secant - sech 
hyperbolic sine - sinh 
hyperbolic tangent - tanh 
hyperSne structure - hfs 
ibidem (in the same place) - ibid. 
id est (that is) - i.e. 
imaginary part - Im 
Incorporated - Inc. 
inelastic (in subscript) - inel 
infrared - ir 
inside diameter - i.d. 
intermediate frequency - if 
International Critical Tables - ICT 
laboratory (in subscript) - lab 
latitude - lat 
limit - lim 
linear combination of atomic orbitals - LCAO 
logarithm - log 
logarithm (natural, base e) - ln 
longitudinal-acoustic - LA 
longitudinal-optic - LO 
magnetomotive force - mmf 
maximum - max 
melting point - mp 
meter-kilogram-second (system) - mks 
29 
minimum - min 
molecular orbital - MO 
north - N 
nota bene (mark well) - N.B. 
not determined - N.D. 
nuclear magnetic resonance - NMR 
number - No. 
observed (in subscript) - obs 
of order less than - o ( ) 
of the order of - O( ) 
outside diameter - o.d. 
page - p. 
pages - pp. 
Part - Pt. 
post meridiem - p.m. 
potential difference - PD 
probable error - pe 
quantum chromodynamics - QCD 
quantum electrodynamies - QED 
quad erat demonstrandum (which was to be demonstrated) - Q.E.D. 
radio-frequency - rf 
random-phase approximation - RPA 
real part - Re 
reference - Ref. references - Refs. 
ribonueleic acid - RNA 
room temperature - RT 
root-mean-square - rms 
secant - sec 
section - Sec. 
sections - Secs. 
Series - Ser. 
signum function - sgn 
30 
sine - sin 
south - S 
square - sq 
standard temperature and pressure - STP 
Supplement - Suppl. 
Systeme International - SI 
tangent - tan 
theory, theoretical (in subscript) - theor 
total (in subscript) - tot 
trace - tr,Tr 
transverse-acoustic - TA 
transverse-electric - TE 
transverse-electromagnetic - TEM 
transverse-magnetic - TM 
transverse-optic - TO 
ultrahigh-frequency - uhf 
ultraviolet - uv 
valence band - VB 
versus - vs 
videlicet (that is to say, namely) - viz. 
Volume - Vol. 
Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin - WKB 
west - W